---
title: charlie gard
date: 2017-07-03
---

The case of an infant born with a rare genetic disorder in the U.K. has captured America's attention as its own healthcare system faces a period of serious uncertainty. [The New York Times summarized the case](https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/03/world/europe/uk-trump-pope-francis-charlie-gard.html): 

>Charlie Gard, who turns 11 months old on Tuesday, was born with an extremely rare genetic disease. He is blind and deaf, and he cannot breathe or move on his own.

>The London hospital that is treating Charlie went to court to request permission to remove him from life support; his parents want to take him to the United States, where they believe that an experimental treatment has a chance — however remote — of saving his life.

>Three courts in Britain agreed with the hospital, as did the European Court of Human Rights, which last week rejected a request by the parents to hear the case, in which they had argued that the hospital was violating the boy’s right to life.

Mitochondrial depletion syndrome, as the name implies, is the result of a congenital dearth of mitochondrial DNA and prevents the body's organs, tissues, and muscles from continuing to develop or function past infancy. The disease progresses from birth and leads to muscle weakness, deafness, blindness, and, in even rarer cases, brain damage. The disease is typically fatal within the first year of life. 

Before writing anything else, I'd like to say one thing: Charlie's parents have been placed in an impossible situation and the decisions they have had to make with respect to their son's treatment are more than any human being could handle. This post is not going to be about them. With a new healthcare bill on the horizon, Charlie's case has given Americans an opportunity to simultaneously glimpse in the mirror and through the looking glass.

# Car Repair or Water Treatment? 

There are any number of conceivable healthcare systems in addition to the plurality already in existence, but any new model will have to contend with one core question. The central question raised by Charlie's case is this: Is healthcare like car repair or like water treatment? I.e., is healthcare a service you seek out in the marketplace, or a right you are entitled to access? 

If healthcare is like car repair, then anyone with the time, money, and need to use it simply needs to seek it out. They should not be needlessly impeded from doing so. In the case of Charlie's parents, given that they were able to privately fund Charlie's care during transit to the United States (he would need specialized care in order to survive the trip) and the experimental treatment he would receive once here, they should be allowed to seek whatever care they feel is best for their son. 

If healthcare is like water treatment, then Charlie is entitled to whatever care is necessary to save his life or alleviate his suffering. However, the extent to which this entitlement applies is necessarily gated by the resources available, the ethical and medical standard of care, and the potential improved quality of life provided by the treatment. The decision that was ultimately made by Charlie's medical team at the Great Ormond Street Hospital and affirmed by the High Court and the European Court for Human Rights was that an experimental nucleoside treatment in the U.S. would not provide a cure for his condition and would not improve Charlie's quality of life, only prolong his suffering. 

The [U.K. hospital explored the experimental nucleoside treatment](http://www.gosh.nhs.uk/frequently-asked-questions-about-charlie-gard-court-case) Charlie would have sought in the U.S at his parent's expense. This information comes from a hospital webpage answering common questions about the Charlie Gard case: 

>Why is there no treatment available at GOSH? There is no cure for Charlie’s condition which is terminal. GOSH explored various treatment options, including nucleoside therapy, the experimental treatment that one hospital in the US has agreed to offer now that the parents have the funds to cover the cost of such treatment. GOSH concluded that the experimental treatment, which is not designed to be curative, would not improve Charlie’s quality of life. 

>How did GOSH come to this decision about his treatment?
GOSH’s clinicians had to balance whether this experimental treatment was in his best interests or not.
 
>One of the factors that influenced this decision was that Charlie’s brain was shown to be extensively damaged at a cellular level. The clinician in the US who is offering the treatment agrees that the experimental treatment will not reverse the brain damage that has already occurred.
 
>Why is there a court process? When parents do not agree about a child’s future treatment, it is standard legal process to ask the courts to make a decision. This is what happened in Charlie’s case.  

Proponents of "Car Repair" healthcare systems have pointed out that it is the "Water Treatment" nature of the U.K's National Health Service that has allowed the hospital and courts to supersede the Gards' authority regarding Charlie's care. In spite of whatever material gains a socialized healthcare system might bring, they claim, this affront to individual autonomy is unconscionable. To phrase it in a way that might be more familiar to followers of the Gard case: "This wouldn't happen in America." 

# The Exploitation of the Sick is a Product of Our Healthcare Model

And they are right. This wouldn't happen in America. In the United States, no matter how many providers refused to continue providing treatment for Charlie, the parents would more often than not find somebody, somewhere willing to continue providing the treatment. The second consequence of this is often neglected; namely, that there is also someone willing to exploit the desperate situations of suffering people. I am not accusing the U.S. physician who offered to continue Charlie's treatment of doing this, but there can be no doubt that this happens all of the time, as anyone who has spent sufficient time near oncology wards can attest. 

Terminally ill patients are perfect marks. They are desperate and not likely to live long enough to realize they are being conned. In the most egregious cases, individual private providers will continue chemotherapy regiments long after they have shown to provide any clinical benefit, for longer periods than dictated by the standard of care, or even subtly increase the doses of radiation for terminal patients in order to bill for more "Grays" (a measurement for medical radiation). While these individuals are few and far between, any oncologist will tell you that they exist. In more subtle cases, for-profit hospitals have systematically provided scientifically dubious (or even bankrupt) treatment to desperate cancer patients for the sake of maximizing the profit potential of a single patient. One such example is [Richard Stephenson's Cancer Treatment Centers of America](https://www.forbes.com/sites/stevensalzberg/2012/12/31/making-a-profit-from-offering-ineffective-therapies-to-cancer-patients/#3edcc6874a2b) which offers naturopathic and homeopathic treatment to its patients. Even if these pseudoscientific treatment regiments were absolutely harmless (which is not always the case), in our fee-for-service model they provide a cheap revenue stream for ethically bankrupt providers to profit at the physical and financial expense of their patients. In a "Water Treatment" or "socialized" healthcare model, there are fewer opportunities for exploitation of this kind; consequently, the rationing of care based on the medical needs and quality of life of the patient actively works against it. 

Second is this question of whether an assault on autonomy took place. To be frank, it is difficult for me to consider this question seriously. [360,000 people die every year (in the U.S.) from preventable diseases according to the CDC](https://www.cdc.gov/media/releases/2014/p0501-preventable-deaths.html) and, pre-Obamacare, somewhere between 20,000 ([Institute of Medicine](https://www.nap.edu/read/10367/chapter/10), 2002) and 45,000 people ([Harvard Medical School](http://news.harvard.edu/gazette/story/2009/09/new-study-finds-45000-deaths-annually-linked-to-lack-of-health-coverage/), 2009) die annually from lack of access to care. Where is the concern for their autonomy? In crude terms, they were not even allowed into the room to decide whether or not they should die from a perfectly treatable disease. These are more than numbers to me. I'm reminded of one patient I translated for at a free clinic last fall. This young patient (early 30s) came in complaining of a GI issue and was found upon examination to need a laparotomy in order to treat internal damage and bleeding which would, in up to 48 hours, lead to a serious, life-threatening infection. While laparotomies are routine surgeries, they can cost up to 2,000 to 7,000 dollars out of pocket and our small charity clinic was not able to provide it. Upon hearing the cost, the patient asked me, "That's more than I make in a month, how am I supposed to feed my family?" I looked him in the eye and told him there was nothing else we could do, but that his life might depend on him making it to an ER equipped to treat his condition. I felt like I was complicit in a crime. 

Autonomy is only a worthwhile question in an equitable, universally accessible system. Otherwise, the only thing "autonomy" means is this: autonomy for the rich, nothing for the poor. 

That being said, let's make the effort to consider autonomy as an abstract concept within the broader healthcare system. The consequence of autonomy in healthcare means that the patient has the ultimate authority regarding decisions about their care. In Charlie's case, this responsibility falls to the parents who are then placed in the impossible situation of having to decide between doing everything they can to preserve the life of their infant child and ending his suffering. This responsibility includes the entitlement to a second, third, fourth opinion, etc. Charlie's parents received that. In the U.K. system, a dispute between care providers and parents is decided in the courts who is asked to determine the patient's best interest and rule in their favor. Charlie's parents received the opportunity to defend their case, in multiple courts. Providers in Spain and Europe denied to continue Charlie's treatment. The dispute has gone on for four months following nearly a year of treatment during which Charlie has received round-the-clock life supporting care. In my opinion, their autonomy was well-respected and the only restriction which was placed on it was their ability to use private funding to prolong their child's suffering beyond the recommendation of several teams of medical professionals and their nation's courts. Comparatively, the uninsured and poor in the U.S. are not recognized to have any entitlement to necessary care, regardless of their personal wishes. There can be no doubt that the infringement on individual rights in the Charlie Gard case does not even begin to compare to those committed every day in the U.S. healthcare model. 

He is a young, white child in a hopeless situation who has been caught up in the middle of a protracted, international medico-legal ordeal. The structural violence tolerated by the U.S. system, on the other hand, is invisible. There is no legal recourse for those with treatable illness and no capital, support. There is no one waiting to interview the droves of the homeless with untreated illness, and no way to recognize those whose undiagnosed cancer will progress unabated until it is too late. This visibility has been exploited by those who would threaten countless more children for the sake of protecting the bankrolls of the superrich. All of that is obvious enough, but I did not want to let it pass without comment. 

I'm not surprised that those most eager to prop up Charlie's case as an affront to human rights are also the most eager to rob the working class of even the most basic healthcare services. The onus is on the common people to recognize this propaganda move as the sham that it is and continue to push for a more just, equitable healthcare model. For those of us that hope to be the care providers and biomedical scientists of the future it is all the more necessary to expose and criticize the violence inherent in our present system and to fight the urge to put our individual interests before those of the people we hope to serve.


