---
title: two-borders
date: 2018-10-30
---
>an ant will drown himself, his body submerging / into ease, his mandibles, head, antennae, baptized. How lovely / to lose your senses to the cup of your want. A boy / drags his mother’s body across the desert, her fluids rising / to God in order to quench her skin/.../Nothing can be given, and he will remember / nothing as he sits in a cell waiting for his sister to come to release / him from his cellular pain. He will only remember water, that want / for the clouds to let go their rain, and how seeing / them dropping, he kept pulling forward, their bodies steady towards that dark, uneven line. ~ For Want of Water, Sasha Pimentel

I've spent the last three weeks flying from one city to the next. The days blend together and each new day reveals some fresh hell just outside my privileged existence. I've joked with other aspiring scientists that my career plan is to stay in training until current faculty retire or the world ends, whichever comes first. The joke has landed a little blunter each time. I wouldn't be the first to call our bit of the twenty-first century a transition, but this month I've felt it more acutely than ever before. Jair Bolsonaro, an out-and-out fascist, has ascended to the Brazilian presidency following the jailing of Lula da Silva, Brazil's most popular politician, and the coup d'etat of Dilma Rousseff some time before at the behest of the Brazilian elite. Her replacement, Michel Temer, the most unpopular politician in the Western Hemisphere (at one point, he boasted single-digit approval ratings). He and his government were so hopelessly corrupt that Temer himself [received an 8 year ban from running for office](https://theintercept.com/2016/06/03/credibility-of-brazils-interim-president-collapses-receives-8-year-ban-on-running/) and several of his ministers were forced to resign for obstructing the same investigation which was used to oust Rousseff. [Bolsonaro is not only worse](https://www.thenation.com/article/brazil-bolsonaro-fascism-right-wing-cultural-politics/), but might be the worst thing to happen to the Latin American continent since Pinochet. Bolsonaro won thanks to a massive disinformation campaign which easily seized the election from the fragmented left and utterly discredited center-right parties. As the urgency of our looming climate crisis becomes clearer by the day, he has promised to rapidly colonize the Amazon (he has compared the indigenous people who call the Amazon their home to "chickenpox") and make the land available for settlement, mining and lumber interests. His threat to carry out "a cleansing never before seen in the history of Brazil" has already been borne out by the killings and maimings of gender and sexual minorities on the part of his supporters, the censorship of Brazillian universities, and promise to give the police a "carte blanche" to kill "criminals". [Imagine being so terrible that even the Economist, a paper usually happy to look the other way on cultural and social concerns to cheerlead for market-friendly leaders, is afraid of what you might do once in power](https://www.economist.com/leaders/2018/09/20/jair-bolsonaro-latin-americas-latest-menace).

Pittsburgh has also witnessed the consequences of the new and emboldened fascism first-hand. The spectre of white supremacy which underscores all of these events, from Bolsonaro to the mail-order pipe bomber, finds its apotheosis in white nationalism. The country, regardless of which it may actually be, is meant for some and not for others (to bring up another example, see Trump's recent announcement to attempt (illegally, btw) to end birthright citizenship). The border, equal parts myth and barbed wire, is just the literal manifestation of the battleground that exists within every inch of the United States. It is, in fact, always one ICE invasion away. As thousands of Central American migrants march northward to face what now appears to be just as many if not several thousands more U.S. troops, and myself being an immigrant, I can't help but think about the border. 

There are many borders. To simplify things, I think it best to think of just two: one for the rich and another for the poor. 

Many people don't know that the U.S. has had open borders for a very long time, it's just very expensive to find your way to the door. The investor visa (E5) program, for example, guarantees a visa to any individual who meets the following criteria:

>To qualify as an immigrant investor, a foreign national must invest, without borrowing, the following minimum qualifying capital dollar amounts in a qualifying commercial enterprise: $1,000,000 (U.S.); or $500,000 (U.S.) in a high-unemployment or rural area, considered a targeted employment area. A qualifying investment must, within two years, create full-time jobs for at least 10 U.S. citizens, lawful permanent residents, or other immigrants authorized to work in the United States, not including the investor and the investor’s spouse, sons, or daughters.

The Diversity Visa program, similarly, provides a way for people from countries not typically represented in the immigration rolls to come to the U.S. This was how my own family was able to immigrate to the U.S. from Venezuela. In Venezuela, we called it the "greencard lottery" but for a long time I've had my suspicions about how random this "lottery" actually is. All of the recipients I've met, my parents included, have been educated professionals. The H1B or "genius" visa, similarly, acts as a mechanism for the U.S. to poach talent from other developed but especially developing countries. 

The final major immigration mechanism is asylum. Asylum is a very tricky thing. The legal pipeline for receiving asylum is very clear: if you have a paper-trail documenting that you are or have been the recipient of politically motivated persecution, then the case is open-and-shut. However, most cases are never this clear-cut. As it turns out, governments intent on harassing and torturing their own citizens for political reasons are not so keen to keep arbitrary detention, kidnappings, murders, death-threats, and racketeering on the books. Second, many if not most migrants seeking asylum are doing so for personal reasons which are only indirectly related to the actual political situation on the ground in their home country. 

I once worked as an interpreter for a young Central American woman who had arrived in the U.S. with her child to escape an abusive partner. She, her legal team, and I spent hours in a small room preparing her story for every possible line of questioning the state might throw at her in an effort to discredit her story and deport her to what I believe would be certain death. While I am being intentionally vague, of this I am sure: if she returned, her partner would kill her and the kid, too. Given recent events, I do not have to explain the inbuilt difficulty of getting a court run by old white men to believe a woman, regardless of the clarity of her pain and desperation. The thought that someone could live and work peacefully in this country and be forced to relive a million traumas a thousand times each in order to justify their own existence on one side of a line in the dirt still turns my stomach. When I read about the migrant camps in Texas, think of the unknown and uncounted bodies buried in the banks of the Rio Grande, the determination of the migrants marching willingly into hostile territory, I can only see her face. You might not believe me but she was even younger than I was. 

Another face I can't seem to shake is JJ Rendon. Many Americans are probably not very familiar with JJ Rendon, but they should be. Juan Jose Rendon Delgado is a right-wing Venezuelan "political consultant" more accurately described as Latin America's incarnation of Karl Rove, but somehow more callous and heartless and cruel. He is best known for using dirty tactics. Indeed, he had been working as Latin America's black propaganda master for years before 'fake news' formally entered the American political imagination.

The top of his wikipedia page reads as follows:

>Juan José Rendón Delgado (born 1964 in Caracas, Venezuela), known professionally as JJ Rendon, is a Latin American political consultant, psychologist and political activist.[3][4] He was the minister of National Defence´s policy adviser during the Alvaro Uribe administration in 2006. Rendon has been credited for the successful presidential campaigns of Juan Manuel Santos (2010 and his 2014 re-election campaign), Porfirio Lobo Sosa (2010), and Enrique Peña Nieto (2012). In 2012, he has named one of the most prominent Latin American consultants by the U.S.-based publication Campaigns & Elections,[5] and inducted into the Hall of Fame of the Political Consulting of the Reed Latino. In 2016, he was named one of "the 10 most important political consultants of the world" along with James Carville, Karl Rove and Mary Matalin by ABC International.

If JJ is editing his own wikipedia page (which he almost certainly is) then he should be given some credit for his modesty. In truth, JJ and his goons have their fingers (overtly or covertly) on just about every political campaign south of the Mason-Dixon. The first red flag is his role in the administration of Alvaro Uribe (in National Defence no less!), in many ways the predecessor to Bolsonaro who for the first time since the Pink Wave revived the old politics of hiding open brutality beneath a shiny veneer of quelling corruption, the war on drugs, supposedly protecting the nation's identity and culture, and market capitalism. To give just one example, for the better part of a decade, the Colombian military under the direction of Alvaro Uribe [executed thousands of civillians (estimates are > 4,000 over 8 years) and dressed up the work as the work of the FARC in a scheme known as "false positives"](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2018/may/08/colombia-false-positives-scandal-casualties-higher-thought-study). In 2013, JJ Rendon worked for the [right-winger Norman Quijano's ARENA party as he sought the presidency in El Salvador](http://cispes.org/article/right-hires-campaign-manager-straight-dirty-honduran-win?fbclid=IwAR1q-mJ9sWBRIjJcnp1gaIsdc_trXXIPz8Zi1TXucTw6Pu68byrrD_ngIY8), which he ultimately lost after being consumed by one corruption scandal after another. Earlier that same year JJ Rendon helped Juan Orlando Hernandez steal the 2013 Honduran general election (the first purportedly democratic general election since the U.S. backed coup which ousted Manuel Zelaya in 2009) through voter intimidation, vote-buying, hundreds of civilian assassinations, and intimidation of election observers. The direct consequences of that coup and the subsequent election in particular can still be felt today and, in fact, are the core drivers behind irregular migration from Honduras to the United States. JJ Rendon was given political asylum in the United States in 2016. 












