
---
title: patricide
---


OK, let's get down to basic facts about what is happening in Venezuela and ask ourselves some simple questions about the situation to determine a position. The chips are down. First, I just want to say that this is written from the perspective of a Vzln on the exterior who has spent most of their life abroad, has a significant amount of family in the country, most of whom are at least disillusioned leftists, many opposition members, and all suffering as a result of the economic crisis in the country. I don't support Maduro or the current iteration of the PSUV, nor have I ever voted for him although I retain my Venezuelan citizenship. I don't write this to score woke points, to play devil's advocate, and I would hope that those of you who know me well would know better than to think I care about those kinds of things. The truth is that every new development rips open my heart and if my brain were not here to try to make some sense of it, I'd die. More on that later.

First, let's take a look at some of the points brought up by a viral social media post which I saw many fellow Vnzln expats share over the past couple of days. The post comes in two-parts, the first is titled, aptly: What Happened in Venezuela. Suffice to say that the entire digital pamphlet is wrong about almost every single detail it mentions but in the interest of time and my sanity I'll hit the most important points. 

>2) Supporting the Venezuelan opposition is not the same as supporting Trump: many Venezuelans are actually avid Democrats in the United States and openly disapprove of almost every policy that Trump has supported. This is a bipartisan issue. U.S. left leaders have expressed concerns with Venezuela's illegitimate dictatorship as well. [It] boils down to a need for democracy. Every country should be entitled to free elections, not to mention basic human rights.

This point aims to squash whatever skepticism might naturally emerge in any half-way decent human being upon realizing that All of the Worst People you Know (Trump, Bolsonaro, John Bolton, Mikes Pompeo and Pence) are all suddenly grandstanding about Freedom!, Democracy!!, and Human Rights!!! You don't support Trump, you support *Venezuelans* who hate Trump just as much as you do. 

Let's please do away with these spectator sport style politics where every single event, ideological confrontation, or question that is raised to the national consciousness must be coopted towards polite society's war against the orange man. I would hope that any thinking person instantly recognizes that Trump, the individual, does not give two shits about Venezuela or Venezuelans, not to mention freedom, democracy, and human rights. However, Trump, the President of the United States and Executive of the Largest Empire on Earth, is a servant to the interests of the Empire. Empire, it turns out, is a bipartisan issue. Let's avoid muddying the waters by trying to guess what the U.S.' interest in Venezuela is, although keen observers [might hazard a guess](https://twitter.com/marcorubio/status/1088414772163461120?fbclid=IwAR2iMRnNt0bA1ZhQCUtRDkrM-kaw6Cmbeu9ZIkmyDBoWhs4DVuLku_rIzCo) and simply try to ascertain whether that interest might be the same as the majority of Venezuelan peoples. After all, that is the heart of this point: Forget about domestic politics and support Venezuelans fighting for their freedom. (Also, not that it matters but [Venezuelans in the U.S. tend to lean Republican as a group more than Democrat](https://www.foxnews.com/politics/venezuelan-americans-are-newest-political-group-making-an-impact-in-florida) which shouldn't be surprising to those who understand the Cuban-American political dynamic; it also aligns with my personal experience in Katyzuela).

It seems we need to answer another question first: Who are the Venezuelan peoples? Are they even politically coherent enough as a group to have a definite political interest? These questions seem almost absurdly simple but let's think a little harder shall we. How many Venezuelans do you know? If you're reading this from Cambridge or Austin, I might be the only one you know. If you know me from Houston then I am one of several hundred if not thousands of Venezuelans you have come in contact with. What if I told you that there were even more of us and they live in a country called Venezuela. I'm sorry for the snark, but I felt it was necessary to make the following point: Venezuelans on the exterior are not representative of the majority of Venezuelans. Look, this is going to be a very contentious point but the class character of Venezuelan expats has changed *significantly* since I came to this country. Whenever I am writing about Vnzla I try to keep my limited perspective in mind, but on this point I believe I am consummately experienced as someone who was a part of the earliest wave of what is now a full-blown diaspora. When we came to the U.S., we had just won the greencard lottery and came here with a lot of human capital (my parents' education and professional experience) and little material capital but together we had much more in terms of opportunity than the majority of Vnzlns ever had or have today. The Vnzln families who are arriving today are coming in with investor visas thanks to the U.S' open-door policy for millionaires; they didn't just get money, they come from money; they didn't live in the boonies or exurbia, but highrises in ritzy Maracaibo and Caracas neighborhoods, armed guards and all. Most of them are oil-rich, coming off dreadful but lucrative stints in Africa or the Middle East where they traded their black Vnzln drivers, maids, nannies, cooks, and *guachingmen* (watchmen) for black African ones. (I recall one holiday get together this past Christmas where several of our family friends swapped live-in maid stories). Some of them are business men, *empresarios* who reincorporated themselves in Houston or Miami and continue to live from the profit of their businesses in Vnzla where [2/3 of the internal economic activity continues to be in the private sector](https://www.thenation.com/article/why-is-venezuela-in-crisis/).

If you know many Venezuelan expats then you also know that the vast, vast majority are openly supportive of what has been deemed, somewhat unfortunately but not inaccurately, Venezuela's political opposition; that is, the parties which make up the M.U.D, or Democratic Unity Roundtable alliance. In particular, if the past two years of political insanity have not completely erased your memories of 2014, you will recall that many were once fervently writing about Leopoldo Lopez, the leader of Voluntad Popular (Popular Will), the same party as Juan Guaido who, by now, you know all about. Is this representative of the population? The two best pollsters in Venezuela are the independently owned and operated Datanalisis and Hinterlaces. The [latest Datanalisis data I found from 2016](https://www.caracaschronicles.com/2016/03/31/fun-numbers-datanalisis-style/) reported that 24% of respondents identified with 'the Opposition', 26% with the PSUV, and 45% as "Independent". In Vnzln parlance, this massive "Independent" block representing the majority of the country are known as 'ni-ni'; that is, 'ni la oposicion, ni el gobierno' (neither the opposition, nor the government). This should give you a picture of Venezuela's deeply fractured, deflated, embattled political climate. To further complicate matters, there are dozens and dozens of broadly 'Left' parties which make up the GPP, the coalition which comes together for presidential elections of which the PSUV carries the most electoral weight. Are you beginning to see the bigger picture? The "Opposition" -- that is, the MUD -- is a huge coalition of *sixteen* political parties (now technically fourteen as COPEI and AD, the two oldest establishment parties in Vnzla have left the coalition), *eleven* of which hold seats in the National Assembly. All sixteen of those (very different, ideologically and practically distinct) parties together have essentially the same amount of popular support as the single largest party of the GPP and number a little less than half of those who support any other political tendency or none at all. This poll was taken after the MUD won a supermajority in the National Assembly in a landslide election, the only one its ever had in its history, which should also give you an idea of the ideological plurality which exists in Vnzla between local and national electoral politics. I don't want to argue about polls though, my broader point is that the Venezuelans on the exterior are not necessarily representative of those on the interior, myself included. Remember Popular Will? Lopez and Guaido's party? It is the third largest opposition party by seats in the National Assembly, holding but 14 of the MUD's 112.

Ok, so now we have some idea about where Vnzlns stand, broadly speaking, in terms of party affiliation and electoral politics and that Vnzlns on the exterior are not necessarily representative of those on the interior. Let us now try to deduce whether or not the U.S' interests in Vnzla align -- indeed, are capable of aligning -- with those of the Vnzln people. [It goes without saying that the vast majority of Vnzlns are opposed to military intervention in their own country](http://hinterlaces.com/). The obvious danger in materially, politically, diplomatically supporting a parallel government which is calling for the military to turn its guns towards the incumbent government is civil war, but as this kind of alarmism does not sit well with me (especially when it gives me horrible anxiety) one must at least begin to doubt that the U.S' intentions are entirely peaceful and benign when the person they immediately put in charge of handling 'the situation' is [Elliot Abrams](https://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/americas/us-politics/venezuela-latest-elliott-abrams-trump-pompeo-maduro-juan-guaido-a8747306.html). (That's an English link for you gringos and Britons but those with Spanish should read the much better piece in the [Mexican newspaper La Jornada](https://www.jornada.com.mx/ultimas/2019/01/25/el-plan-de-intervencion-estadunidense-en-venezuela-7960.html)). Elliot Abrams was convicted of several crimes as a result of his key role in providing political and material support to the Contras and death squads in El Salvador, Guatemala, Nicaragua that other time the U.S. became, uh, enthusiastic about Freedom, Democracy, and Human Rights in Central and Latin America. He was eventually pardoned by H.W. Bush as a result of his, I presume, "passion for the liberties of all people," as Mike Pompeo put it this week. If this is the man tasked with leading Venezuela's "liberation" then I struggle to see the universe where his, and therefore the U.S', goals can align with those of the Venezuelan people. Regime change alone will not solve the crisis and if history is any teacher we know that it will not be the sole goal of the U.S. in Venezuela. To what extent is Guaido complicit in this? It is difficult to say [beyond acknowledging that he needed the Boss' approval to make his move](https://www.wsj.com/articles/a-call-from-pence-helped-set-an-uncertain-new-course-in-venezuela-11548430259), as he is a virtual unknown and reached his current lofty position as *Libertador* almost by process of elimination. However, whatever his intentions he will face significant pressure to give the U.S. whatever it may want. In the last analysis the rule of Empire is but one: obey or die.


There are some other points in this fucking thing, e.g. "This is not a U.S. led coup" which appear to merely insist on a more complex interpretation of what should be a simple observation like some kind of reactionary Magritte. Ditto for "This isn't an issue rooted in racism"; I wouldn't go so far as to say this Byzantine and decades running political and historical process is *merely* rooted in racism, but race is still an important element which intersects with the class character of Venezuela's many political divisions. I digress. There is no doubt that this is a coup. Suppose that you are of the opinion that, in spite of what I wrote above, All of This is Right and Just. It's still a coup. If it being a coup gives you pause, well, good, but if you're going to support a U.S-led coup then at least come out and say it and leave the lying to the professionals at the U.S. State Dept.

I don't think I can even keep writing about this. It's too hard. I have never felt more alienated from my own Venezuelan community. It's painful to watch other Vnzlns speak so casually about a situation that could easily devolve into civil war or worse. I see Mike Pompeo at the UN Security Council meeting calling for nations of the world to "take sides" and I'm reminded of [Madeline Albright](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=omnskeu-puE) defending the murder of 500,000 Iraqi children as 'worth it'. Has the spectator sport ethic of American politics corrupted us so much that we should take any joy in anything that is happening right now? Have we no sense of our history, of the history of Latin America, or at least a basic understanding of the difference between those of us on the exterior and those on the ground in Venezuela? I feel like a coward. Right-wingers joke about moving to Venezuela if you like socialism so much, but are they totally wrong? Wouldn't that be the right thing to do, as a Venezuelan and a socialist? Move to Venezuela and struggle alongside the Vnzln working class for a real, sustainable revolutionary process driven from the bottom-up? The truth is that there's nothing for me in Venezuela, no future. I don't belong there. My culture is important to me, essential even, but I don't know how I'd even adjust to such a different mode of life, hustling always, constantly in danger, with no guarantees for the future. The Venezuelan community in Houston has grown large and bourgeois enough that the presumption of basic solidarity which used to be there is now gone. We've imported our internal divisions with us. Former Chavistas and socialist sympathizers are sniffed out and excommunicated. Pastelitos, a Venezuelan restaurant on Eldridge in Houston, had a sign on its door around the time of the Constituent Assembly vote in 2017 which read: We dont serve Chavistas. I wonder if it's still there. 

The slogan of the GPP is Unity, Unity and more Unity!; the MUD's is Unity! When every election is an existential struggle on the international stage, either to topple a 'dictatorship' or defend the sovereignty of the nation, there can be nothing but "Unity" despite the deep contradictions at the bedrock of Vnzln civil society. If those contradictions are not reckoned with, if the Venezuelan people are not given a real opportunity to solve their own problems then this depressing reality which has disillusioned so many Venezuelans will only continue. The spectre of international intervention and the opposition's intense focus on regime change with no coherent political agenda behind it have led to the apotheosis of lesser evilism; to paraphrase [Hal Draper](https://www.marxists.org/archive/draper/1967/01/lesser.htm), both coalitions are organizing votes for Satan because Beelzebub is worse.

A few of the points in the pamphlet allude to the Venezuelan constitution so I guess I'll address that as briefly as possible. I really don't think getting bogged down by constitutions is particularly useful as, as one friend put it, the final logic always appears to be circular: This constitution is unconstitutional, it's legal because it's illegal, etc. Here's what I mean. The articles in the Venezuelan constitution which Guaido referenced in his presidential declaration refer to the ability of the sovereign power (in Venezuelan law, the sovereign power refers to the fifth branch of the government, that is the Venezuelan people themselves) to call for a public convention at any time and decide in the presence of their Latin American neighbors or their representatives that there should be a new executive. In the constitution, this would mean that the electoral branch of the government (yes, the electoral commission or CNE is its own branch of government) would oversee a public vote over a series of candidates; essentially it is a kind of emergency snap election. Now, assuming no one else had anything to say about this, Guaido would serve as interim president as new elections were called as the current head of the National Assembly, a position which rotates between representatives of the constituent parties of the assembly once a year. Seems legit, right? Well, there are a few problems. First, the electoral branch does not recognize Guaido's declaration. Why not? Because the National Assembly was declared void by the Supreme Court in 2016 after it refused to investigate allegations of voter fraud in the election of three candidates. The opposition's objection to this is that the electoral and judicial branches are both controlled by members of the ruling party, which is accurate, and since the government is illegitimate are themselves null and void. To complicate things *even further*, there is the question of the *supra*national body whose authority in the constitution supersedes all but the sovereign power, the Constituent Assembly assigned in 2017 to rewrite the constitution. The opposition boycotted that election and does not recognize the legitimacy of the Constituent Assembly. So, you see our conundrum. The Constituent's Assembly and three branches of government do not recognize the fourth, and vice versa, while the fifth branch, the people themselves, are deeply divided, disillusioned, and suffering as the result of an extraordinary economic crisis brought about by the collapse of the oil rentier economy in 2013 and international economic sanctions against country. So, to reiterate: this constitution is unconstitutional, it's legal because it's illegal, etc. 

When the chips are down, all of this legal jargon is bullshit. It comes down to one question: on which side do the correlation of forces lie? For the moment, the internal correlation of forces are on the side of Maduro and the PSUV, with the military refusing to accept the opposition's pleas. The opposition has even, rather ominously I might add, published a document [promising amnesty](https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2019/01/venezuela-crisis-latest-updates-190123205835912.html) for those members of the military who support their cause. The proposal begs the question: are government supporters therefore guilty of something by default, and, if so, what? One is reminded of the first US-backed coup d'etat in 2002 where the first thing the opposition did after seizing the capital was tear up the constitution, jail government ministers and politicians, and beat prominent Chavistas in the streets, some of those beatings courtesy of [Leopoldo Lopez](https://foreignpolicy.com/2015/07/27/the-making-of-leopoldo-lopez-democratic-venezuela-opposition/) (then mayor of Chacao, Caracas) by the way. That said, the international correlation of forces are, unlike in both 2002 and 2014, decidedly in support of Guaido. The pink tide has given way to a brown wave of resurgent right-wing governments in Latin-America and the balance of power in the region now openly supports regime change in Venezuela. The major international bodies like the UN and EU are currently undecided, but just today the EU gave Maduro an ultimatum: hold an election in eight days or we back Guaido. The context behind this decision is the May 2018 election which saw Maduro elected to his second term as president; the election was highly controversial and irregular, with half of the opposition parties boycotting the election including Voluntad Popular/Popular Will. Unlike every other election in modern Venezuelan history, UN and EU delegations were not present for the election. If we got into that, this post would never be finished but suffice to say that this is essentially the root cause behind the EU's demand for new elections. Maduro's immediate response has been to say that if Spain wants elections to hold them in Spain, so it does not appear that Maduro's government will be accepting that ultimatum for the time being. 

There's a lot more to say but I've already spent way too much time and energy writing this so I'll move on from basic facts and towards simple questions.

Is the U.S. interest in Venezuela the same as the Venezuelan people's? Can it be?

Is the motivation behind the U.S.' involvement in this situation concerns about democracy, freedom, and human rights?

Can Imperialism ever be justified? 

What does the support of open fascists like Bolsonaro mean for the political future of the opposition and its behavior in the region were it to gain power?

Do we expect the situation in Venezuela to improve or worsen for the majority of Venezuelans if regime change is achieved through a U.S. led coup?

John Bolton has labeled Venezuela, Nicaragua, and Cuba as the "troika of tyranny"; are any of these countries a threat to the United States? If not, what is the U.S' interest in claiming that they are?

You will all be able to intuit my own answers to these questions. But I think they are important questions to be asking. My main motivation in writing this is that there has been zero critical coverage of what is happening in Venezuela in English-speaking outlets and if I at least peaked your skepticism into the dominant narrative over the situation in Venezuela then I've done my job. [I'll close with a link to the open letter signed by 70 intellectuals urging the U.S. against intervening in Venezuela's affairs.](https://venezuelanalysis.com/analysis/14249).

That's it. I've so much more to say, but I can't. I feel like a no one, a coward. I'm not here or there. I can't love this country and the more I love my home the more I fear its obliteration. I want to love my compatriots on the exterior but they appear to hate me. I want nothing more than to be wrong.
