---
title: el calvario de la hermandad migrante
date: 2019-11-14
---

This week SCOTUS heard oral arguments in a case which will decide the fate of hundreds of thousands of people who have lived and worked in this country for most of their lives without guarantee that the country would ever give them anything in return, in fear, without official representation. People whose safety and rights have for nearly a decade been declared conditional; conditional on the whims of the executive, of Congress, of homeland security, of their hometown mayor, of their bosses, of every authority figure present — incidentally or constitutively — in every aspect of their lives. 

In 2018, the Mexican physician, writer, and poet Hermann Bellinghausen published an essay in the newspaper *La Jornada* called ["El calvario de la hermandad migrante"](https://www.jornada.com.mx/sin-fronteras/2018/10/29/el-calvario-de-la-hermandad-migrante-2290.html?fbclid=IwAR1ncJKkHSDkvZrAiVnh3CTwph9ubuXJaJ2RSYeg0q23EKG3Xs3dSHBQ1RI) or "The cavalry of the brotherhood of migrants" when the then current iteration of our perpetual migrant crisis appeared centered on what was being called "a caravan" of migrants, primarily from Central America. I decided to publish my English translation of his essay here in reflection. 

#THE CAVALRY OF THE BROTHERHOOD OF MIGRANTS

Our sibling territories in the isthmus of America from which travelers incessantly depart towards the uncertain cruelty of Mexico and the United States are the most beautiful and suffering of our planet. Honduras, El Salvador, and Guatemala are Latin Americas most prominent and gaping open wounds. Their people, industrious and peaceful people, jubilant and loving people, to whom much has been denied — justice, ownership of their world, liberty to access the riches beneath their own feet — have been obligated to flee their homes, their streets, their towns and cities where they were born and lived. As various human rights organizations now insist, the Central American exodus is, in fact, a result of forced displacement.  

We are faced with the most perverse social situation imaginable. For years, Honduras has produced the majority of the people who dare cross the Mexican inferno to crawl towards the frontier of Eldorado. It is a nation the United States has never let *be*. Yankee domination in Honduras is absolute, brutal, it almost appears natural, even. For the soldiers of the Empire and their servile military partners, mercenaries and paramilitaries, Honduras has served as a base of operations, as a brothel, no man's land. It has served as a platform for counterinsurgency directed at controlling Nicaragua, El Salvador, and Guatemala in their revolutionary hours, and persists as such, indefinitely. A nation without sovereignty and when the germ of sovereignty emerged in the past decade, the Clinton falconess gifted to Obama a coup d'etat of the old school, cynical and without mercy. Washington has simply decided that Honduras shall never be a country, rather it shall be a comfortable accident on the map, a place to hide its backyard chess pieces.

It hurts to the bone to see the bosses of the empire denigrate and defame with impunity this multitude of people which favors them. This multitude is burdened by pain, albeit without defeat or resignation. The Yankees created a place like this: a paradise of provincial mafias, an ungovernable nation, where women are killed or trafficked like cattle, where a child's education is the violence of death, where life has no value. Infiltrated to the core for decades by US and Israeli intelligence agencies, it serves as a proving ground for the armies of both these praetorian and theocratic nations: the Empire and its favorite ally. Our brothers on the march are so defenseless that officials in Washington can calmly accuse them of whatever no matter how stupid, without evidence, for example: muslim terrorists paid with gold from Caracas, organized by gangs from hell with the perverse intention of violating the sacred border of the Promised Land. In the eyes of Washington, the migrants do not rise to the status of people, they are alien vermin if anything. 

The moving chronicles of Blanche Petrich reveal the living flesh of a century of beatings and a dismembered society where each generation is destroyed by the next. As the Honduran poet laureate Roberto Sosa wrote, "our childhood is obliterated in the trap prepared by our elders." It is a world where people live poorly, disappear, die without a trace, are kidnapped, or flee to the United States: if from there comes disgrace, there it must be that grace resides. The Guatemalan poet Francisco Morales Santos inquired 45 years ago: "How long has it been since you returned / to your home / to brush off your chair / or sit by the fire." 

They have in Honduras and Guatemala armies and police which inflict their hate towards the general population which then flees from it. In Chiapas the baton of hate is taken up by the police and the Mexican *migra*, not to mention the animosity which awaits them at the *Border* to the north. The migrants refuse to allow repression to stop them in their tracks. The Salvadorean Roque Dalton says it in a tone so local it becomes universal, and familiar: "the police and the guards / always looked at the people / as a heap of backs which ran from them / like a canvas to absorb the hate of their garrotes." It is a cruel world which Roberto Sosa recounts with desperate tenderness: "Over the sensation of emptiness beneath my feet. Over the tip-toe steps which fear and doubt have edified. Over the earth of the no man's land of History: we are without a world, naked to our living blush and the mud which covers us, narrowly surrounded by the air we still have." 

And yet they move. 
