---
title: what is a medical education for? 
date: 2021-12-13
---

Three years into grad school, I've officially finished my first quarter of grad school-- no, no that one, the other one. Calling medical school "grad school" is misleading, for a couple of reasons. Most of all because medical school is actually considered "undergraduate" medical education or UME (although one does earn a doctorate at the end of it), and the "grad school" of medicine is residency, aka graduate medical education or GME. Anyways, two years and one board exam later, I'm now fully a PhD student. It's an adjustment, but a good one, on balance. I'm struggling with learning and relearning skills I once had and with the already palpable feeling of losing my hard-won medical knowledge with each passing day. My knowledge of clinical medicine was already embarassingly inadequate even at its peak. Balancing medical school with lab work, trying to build a competitive application for our internal MSTP process was simply too hard. I learned enough to pass every exam, even Step 1 of the boards, and for that I'm proud and grateful, but to be quite honest a "good medical student", I was (am?) not. 

But that's how everyone feels. Maybe there's one or two outliers but that insidious feeling of inadequacy is the rule in medicine. Some call it impostor syndrome, but I think that's wrong. Impostor syndrome implies that the hypothetical "impostor" is really precisely where they ought to be and, for a variety of pscyhological and structural reasons, cannot accept credit for their actual competence and potential. But this feeling is so commonplace in medicine we should consider that it is produced by design, and this is my own theory: namely, that the person medical education is ideally suited for simply does not exist. The medical student, sensing (albeit unconsciously) the gaping maw between their already high-strung, neurotic, extraordinarily high achieving selves and the Platonic Best Medical Student, is not a pseudo-"impostor", rather they are feeling the real difference between human limitations and impossible expectations. The medical student is a horse in a sea of horses wishing it was a pegasus.

Here's what I mean: in medical school it quickly becomes apparent that to know even just the sliver of medicine that is covered in your lectures and board exams is such a monumental undertaking that the only possible way to survive is by consuming large volumes of information at a rapid pace with minimal pause, understanding, or comprehension. Mnemonics, memory palaces, flashcard apps powered by spaced repetition algorithms are the tools of the trade. Medical school wants you to learn medicine, unsurprisingly; that is, obtain a foundational and general education in human physiology, pathology, and treatment of disease. But to the student, "learning medicine" is no longer the goal, but passing and especially passing and excelling at the boards is the target to aim for. It can either be heartening or defeating that the majority of preclinical content will simply not be applicable to the day-to-day clinical medicine you will learn on the wards, but ultimately encyclopedic understanding of all of human physiology is simply not achievable by most human beings or even required for a clinician. Medical school is supposed to be a foundational education, a preparation for a lifetime of learning and re-learning, but medicine itself has ballooned so rapidly and extensively as a field that UME has effectively boiled down to hazing in advance of the more focused, hands-on, but decidedly less protected education of residency (+/- fellowship). Students coming in with well-formed ideas of what they want to do for a career know in advance a tremendous amount of effort memorizing subjects they will never review in training or practice will simply be wasted. Likewise, students without any clue as to what kind of doctor they want to be when they grow up will face the insurmountable task of being confronted with a deluge of material with no sense of what is truly important for them. Both are Sisyphus with his boulder. 

So, if most of what you "learn" you will simply forget, know only in a shallow extent, or even be outdated by the time you graduate, what is a medical education for? If the purpose of the education is to pass licensing exams, then the current level of effort expended by most med students is incredibly excessive. If the purpose of medical education was to excel at board exams to impress residency program directors in the match, what now that the exam most able to discriminate students, the USMLE Step 1, will only report a binary outcome? If the purpose of medical education is to figure out what kind of physician you will be, then why are clinical students graded, and why is the most desired evaluation the kind that describes you as performing at a level exceeding your training? Why expect perfection or mastery beyond one's level of someone ideally meant to form a professional identity? I propose (and I don't think this is very controversial) that the "purpose" of medical education, as it is, is for students to successfully enter GME, in other words, to "Match". A "successful" match will differ from student to student. To some, it means matching at their preferred location, with a partner; to others, it means matching a certain specialty or even specific institution. Without a match, a student faces the existential threat of being often more than 200,000 dollars in debt with no immediate prospect of employment capable of ever servicing that account (unless Joe finally caves and forgives our loans, which he won't).

What we've created is an environment where perfection is impossible, but expected (on paper, anyways). Medical school simultaneously pushes you to work harder and longer, indefinitely, while telling you that it effectively does not matter how you perform past a certain level of competency because you have quite literally a lifetime to learn, re-learn, and re-learn again what you need to know. The metrics of assessment are either biased or meaningless, but career-defining nonetheless. Since education is subservient to the needs of the Match, Dermatology and Orthopedic surgery, and the other ultracompetitive specialties effectively dictate the norms and values of the entire educational structure. The need to differentiate a mass of students in order to sort them into a finite number of highly desired spots is not at all a pre-requisite of "learning medicine", but it is the most important organizing principle of medical education nonetheless, in large part because having the most access to the most desirable specialties, residencies, institutions, opportunities, etc. is desirable to students. More importantly, it means that the incentives from the perspective of the student are set not by deliberative bodies or even general principles but by the whims of overworked, understaffed program directors stretched far too thin to put eyes on the majority of applications that hit their desk. 

Whatever is supposed to constitute a foundational education in physiology, pathology, and treatment of disease has become so extensive and overwhelming that the definition of what that is supposed to mean has been supplanted with "whatever is tested on the board exams" even as those very same exams have become increasingly detached from reality and practice in order to continue to differentiate students who have themselves become better and better at studying for and beating the very same exams. Step 1 going P/F helps, but it does nothing to fix the underlying problem: the forces that determine what is valuable to the medical student are arbitrary, almost completely divorced from the priorities of MedEd, and there is very little consensus on what actually constitutes a "foundational" medical education, what every physician ought to know.

It's an odd crisis, because in many ways the stakes have never been lower in medical education for students, from the perspective of the educator. Preclinical curricula are pass/fail at virtually every medical school in the country (with some caveats, some schools still use the preclinical years in determining class rank). Step 1 is following suit. At a small––but growing––number of schools even the clinical years are pass/fail. In two to three years, some medical students will be graduating with nothing on their medical school transcript but a big fat P. The rest of their academic record will be represented in the MSPE (a form letter of unclear, controversial, and poorly defined value), whatever letters of recommendation they apply with, class rank (wherever applicable), Step 2 CK (the last of the scored pre-Match board exams), and finally research or other activities, honors, etc. Anyone who isn't a medical student will read this and think: wait, this doesn't sound too bad. Almost everything that can vary is at least partially in your control.

But things look pretty different on the medical student side. Obviously med students have a lot of conflicting and differing opinions on this, but *generally* speaking medical students